source: https://ctext.org/wiki.pl?if=gb&res=188916

In the past, at the beggining, in the middle of the blue sky, the vast expanse of the blue realm, an empty song resounds grandly over the dark earth, receiving the initiation from the Primordial essence to guide countless beings of the highest capacities. Expected is to recite this scripture, circumambulating ten times - hence inviting the ten directions, beggining to lead to the throne. True and great heavenly being, the most revered sage, realized person of marvelous pratice, who, without harshness, repromands the masses, reaches the vermillion heaven riding the sky and a beautiful jade green carriage; Feathers forming a canopy, providing shade; a vital essence, vivid with five colours flows, Shining brightly in the vast emptiness. For seven days and nights all celestial bodies stop in their motion, the heaveanly wind goes quiet, mountains and seas cover the clouds, all thoughts becomes calm, one and the same, once again without high or low, The earth all becomes jade; without the existence of different apperances. Attending to the masses, the primoedial heavenly one  seated above, floating in emptiness, on top of a lion of five colors. Speaking of the scriptures all throughout, all heavenly sages at the same time praised virtue [within the scriptures] - leading to the opening of all of the ears of people of the land; twice [times reciting the scripture] and it is clear infront of their once blinded eyes; three times and though they were once mute, they can now speak words. Fourt times, and those who where lame can now walk; five times and the bodies of those who were once chronically ill, return back to normal; six timea and white hairs return black again and lost teeth grow back again; seven times and old become strong again and the young grow strong. eight times and the woman and bird become pregnant - all those previously born and those not yet born all attain rebirth; nine times and the ground flourishes with golden jade dew; ten times and shirevelled bones anew and evryone matures. At that point, everyone devotes their hearts, is proteced in their ractice and obtains long life   

道言：是時，元始天尊，說經一徧，東方無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經二徧，南方無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經三徧，西方無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經四徧，北方無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經五徧，東北無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經六徧，東南無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經七徧，西南無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經八徧，西北無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經九徧，上方無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。說經十徧，下方無極無量品至真大神，無鞅之眾，浮空而至。十徧周竟，十方無極天真大神，一時同至。一國男女，傾心歸仰。來者有如細雨密霧，無鞅之眾，迮國一半，土皆偏陷，非可禁止。於是元始懸一寶珠，大如黍米，在空玄之中，去地五丈。元始登引，天真大神，上聖高尊，妙行真人，十方無極至真大神，無鞅數眾，俱入寶珠之中。天人仰看，唯見勃勃從珠口中入。既入珠口，不知所在。國人廓散，地還平正，無復欹陷。元始即於寶珠之內，說經都竟，眾真監度，以授於我，當此之時，喜慶難言。法事粗悉，諸天復位，倏欻之間，寂無遺響。是時，天人遇值經法，普得濟度，全其本年，無有中傷，傾土歸仰，咸行善心。不殺不害，不嫉不妬，不淫不盜，不貪不欲，不憎不嫉，言無華綺，口無惡聲，齊同慈愛，異骨成親，國安民豐，欣樂太平，經始出教，一國以道，預有志心，宗奉禮敬，皆得度世。

"The Dao declares: At that time, Yuan Shi Tian Zun* expounded the scriptures ten times. From the boundless East, South, West, North, Northeast, Southeast, Southwest, Northwest, Upper, and Lower directions, countless truly great deities, a multitude without reins, floated and arrived. Completing the circuit of ten times, the boundless heavenly true great deities all arrived simultaneously. The men and women of the nation, moved by reverence, turned their hearts toward the divine.

The arrivals were like a fine rain and dense mist, an unrestrained multitude covering half the country, causing the land to tilt and sink, beyond control. In response, Yuan Shi suspended a precious pearl, large as millet, in the profound emptiness, five zhang above the ground. Ascending, Yuan Shi drew in the heavenly true great deities, the supremely sacred and revered, and the marvelous practicing true humans. Deities from the ten directions, a multitude without reins, all entered the precious pearl.

Heavenly and human beings gazed upward, witnessing the flourishing entry from the pearl's mouth. After entering, the deities' whereabouts became unknown. The people dispersed, the land leveled, and the tilting ceased. Yuan Shi, within the precious pearl, completed the scripture expounding. The multitude of true deities supervised, instructing and imparting teachings. At this moment, joy and celebration were beyond expression. The affairs of the law were understood, heavenly beings returned to their positions, and silence prevailed instantly.

At this time, heavenly and human beings, encountering the principles of scriptures, universally attained salvation, completing their lifespans without harm. The land turned toward reverence, and all practiced benevolent hearts. No killing, no harm, no jealousy, no envy, no licentiousness, no theft, no greed, no desire, no hatred, no envy. Words lacked embellishment, mouths lacked malicious sounds. All were in harmony with kindness and love. Diverse beings became kin, the country was secure, the people were prosperous, joyous, and peaceful. As the scriptures began to be taught, the nation followed the Dao, anticipating with sincere hearts, upholding with reverence, and all attained salvation in this world."

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yuanshi_Tianzun - one of the three pure ones, said to have come into existence at the beggining of time through the merging of pure breaths 


道言：元始天尊說經中所言，並是諸天上帝內名隱韻之音，亦是魔王內諱，百靈之隱名也，非世上之常辭。上聖已成真人，通玄究微，能悉其章，誦之十過，諸天遙唱，萬帝設禮，河海靜默，山嶽藏雲，日月停景，璇璣不行，群魔束形，鬼精滅爽，迴屍起死，白骨成人。至學之士，誦之十過，則五帝侍衛，三界稽首，魔精喪眼，鬼祆滅爽，濟度垂死，絕而得生。所以爾者，學士穢氣未消，體未洞真，召制十方，威未制天。政德可伏御地祇，束縛魔靈，但卻死而已，不能更生。輕誦此章，身則被殃。供養尊禮，門戶興隆，世世昌熾，與善因緣，萬災不幹，神明護門。斯經尊妙，獨步玉京，度人無量，為萬道之宗，巍巍大梵，德難可勝。

"The Dao speaks, conveying the words of the Primordial Venerable Heaven found in the scriptures, which are also the hidden names within the various heavens and gods, as well as forbidden names within demon kings and the concealed names of the hundred spirits. These are not common expressions in the world. The Supreme Sage, having become a true person, penetrates the profound and investigates the subtle, fully understanding the chapters and reciting them ten times. The various heavens sing from afar, myriad emperors arrange rituals, rivers and seas are quiet and still, mountains and peaks conceal clouds, the sun and moon halt their radiance, and the stars do not move. Demonic beings have their forms restrained, ghostly spirits have their brilliance extinguished, and corpses are resurrected, the dead revived, and white bones become people. Accomplished scholars, when reciting it ten times, have the Five Emperors serve and guard, and the Three Realms bow in respect. Demonic spirits lose their eyes, ghostly deities have their brilliance extinguished, and those on the brink of death are saved, cut off from suffering, and attain rebirth. Therefore, scholars with impure energies not yet dispelled, bodies not yet penetrated to the truth, calling upon and controlling the ten directions, and authority not yet restrained heaven. Virtue and morality can subdue and govern the Earth spirits, bind and restrain demonic spirits, but it ends in death and cannot be reborn. Lightly reciting this chapter will afflict the body. Offering sacrifices with respect and propriety, doors and households prosper, generation after generation flourishes and thrives with the causes and conditions of goodness, myriad disasters do not touch, and gods and spirits protect the gate. This scripture is profound and wonderful, solely walking in the Jade Capital, saving and delivering countless people, and being the origin of myriad paths. Majestic Great Brahma, virtue difficult to surpass."

道言：凡誦是經十過，諸天齊到，億曾萬祖，幽魂苦爽，皆即受度，上昇朱宮，格皆九年，受化更生，得為貴人。而好學至經，功滿德就，皆得神仙，飛昇金闕，遊宴玉京也。上學之士，修誦是經，皆即受度，飛昇南宮。世人受誦，則延壽長年，後皆得作尸解之道，魂神暫滅，不經地獄，即得返形，遊行太空。此經微妙，普度無窮，一切天人莫不受慶，無量之福，生死蒙惠，上天所寶，不傳下士。至士齎金寶效心，盟天而傳。輕泄漏慢，殃及九祖，長役鬼官。侍經五帝，玉童玉女各二十四人，營衛神文，保護受經者身。

"The Dao declares that those who recite this scripture ten times will gather all heavens and countless ancestors. Ghosts in suffering or bliss will be immediately saved and ascend to the Vermilion Palace, each taking nine years, undergoing transformation and rebirth, becoming noble beings. Diligent learners who study the classics with accomplishments and virtues fulfilled will become immortals, soaring to the Golden Gate, and enjoying leisure in the Jade Capital. learners dedicated to learning, when reciting this scripture, will be saved and ascend to the Southern Palace.

Common people who receive and recite the scripture will extend their lives, learn the path of becoming a spirit and transcending death, avoiding hell, and freely wandering in the vast space. The scripture is described as profound and subtle, universally saving countless beings, bringing immeasurable blessings in life and death. It is treasured by the heavens but not shared with the commoners. Noble individuals bring gold and treasures, dedicating their hearts, swearing to heaven, and transmitting the scripture. Careless leakage or slow transmission may bring disaster to nine generations, resulting in long-term servitude under the rule of evil spirits.

The scripture is served under the Five Emperors* by twenty-four Jade Boys and Jade Girls each, establishing defenses with divine arts to protect those who receive the scripture."

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_Sovereigns_and_Five_Emperors

道言：正月長齋，誦詠是經，為上世亡魂，斷地逮役，度上南宮。七月長齋，誦詠是經，身得神仙，諸天書名，黃籙白簡，削死上生。十月長齋，誦詠是經，為國王帝主，君臣父子，安鎮國祚，保天長存，世世不絕，常為人君，安鎮其方，民稱太平。八節之日，誦詠是經，得為九宮真人。本命之日，誦詠是經，魂神澄正，萬炁長存，不經苦惱，身有光明，三界侍衛，五帝司迎，萬神朝禮，名書上天，功滿德就，飛昇上清。

"The Dao instructs that during the first month of prolonged fasting, one should recite and chant scriptures to aid lost souls, sever earthly bindings, and transcend to the southern palace. In the seventh month, similar practices lead to divine immortality, with names recorded in heavenly books, ensuring an elevated afterlife. The tenth month's fasting and recitation are for the prosperity of rulers and the nation, bringing enduring peace. On eight festival days, reciting scriptures allows one to become a true individual in the Nine Palaces. On one's birthday, reciting the scriptures purifies the soul, ensures enduring energy, and leads to a blessed, enlightened life, guarded by the realms, welcomed by the Five Emperors, and recognized by myriad gods, culminating in ascent to the Upper Pure realm."

道言：行道之日，皆當香湯沐浴，齋戒入室，東向，叩齒三十二通，上聞三十二天，心拜三十二過，閉目，靜思身坐青黃白三色雲炁之中，內外蓊冥，有青龍、白虎、朱雀、玄武、獅子、白鶴，羅列左右，日月照明，洞煥室內，項生圓象，光映十方，如此分明。密咒曰：
The Way says: On the day of practicing the Way, one should take a bath with fragrant soup, fast and abstain, enter a room facing east. Knock teeth thirty-two times, listen upward to the thirty-two heavens, worship the heart with thirty-two gestures. Close the eyes, meditate quietly, sit in meditation within the clouds of green, yellow, and white qi. Inside and outside are dense and dark, with mythical creatures like Azure Dragon, White Tiger, Vermilion Bird, Black Tortoise, Lion, and White Crane arranged in rows on the left and right. The sun and moon illuminate, brightening and enlightening inside the room, a round image born from the neck. Light reflects in ten directions, clear like this. A secret mantra is said:

無上玄元太上道君，召出臣身中三五功曹，左右官使者，侍香玉童，傳言玉女，五帝直符，直日香官，各三十二人，關啟所言，今日吉慶，長齋清室，修行至經，無量度人，願所啟上徹，俓御無上三十二天元始上帝至尊几前。

"Supreme Mysterious Primordial Supreme Dao Lord, summoning officials and attendants from within the body, including left and right officials. Attendants with fragrant and jade-like qualities serve, and messages about jade maidens are transmitted. The Five Emperors issue direct orders related to officials associated with the sun and fragrant offerings. Each of these officials has thirty-two individuals, and this is related to what has been announced by Guan Qi. Today is considered auspicious, observing a long fast and purifying the space. The practice extends to studying scriptures and involves immeasurable beings. The wish is for the opening and enlightenment, along with reverence and service to the supreme thirty-two heavenly origin deities before the throne."

畢，引炁三十二過，東向誦經。
"After completion, lead vital energy through thirty-two passes, facing east and reciting scriptures."
