"大學之道，在明明德，在親民，在止於至善" - "the way of great learning is to actualise illustrious virtue, to love the people and to rest in the highest excellence" 

"明德者，人之所得乎天，而虛靈不昧，以具眾理而應萬事者也"* - "As for one with clear virtue, it is what they obtain from heaven, and the numinous emptiness is not obscured; it is because one possesses The principle of the myriad phenomena which is non different to all things."

The term 虛靈 (xūlíng) was used by Zhu Xi to describe attributes of the mind that is, empty (虛) and spirit (靈). Begining with the former, we can understand 'empty' with the analogy of a mirror (many neo-confucian scholars use this explanation) ; a mirror that is reflecting no object is empty and it is also this inherent emptiness that allows to reflect objects in the first place, likwise is the human mind empty in its original state therefore it can encounter and accept external objects. 'Spirit' is considered a seperate property of the mind ; with the same analogy: although it is inherently empty, the essence of a mirror can be said to depend on its function of reflecting objects and this essence is the actual action of the mind interacting with external objects.  虛靈 is considered to be an attribute that only the human mind posseses (ie. animals don't have it) since animals don't have the ability to discern right from wrong or investiagte the fundamental principles behind things. It was also taught that 靈 arised from the combination of li and qi or for those who held that the mind was constituted of purely qi only, they insisted that the 'spirit' aspect of the mind arised from the uniqueness of the heart itself, which is the clearest and most precise part of the qi.

"但為氣稟所拘，人欲所蔽，則有時而昏；然其本體之明，則有未嘗息者"* - "yet bound by an endowed disposition, and obstructed by desires, there are times when [the mind] is confused. However, its original state is clear though there has never been a moment of stillness."

following from the above concept of 虛靈, emptiness is obscured and tinged by desire. 


"故學者當因其所發而遂明之，以復其初也。新者，革其舊之謂也，言既自明其明德，又當推以及人，使之亦有以去其舊染之污也"* - "Therefore, learners should understand it according to what arises from it, thereby restoring its original state. The new is what is called the replacement of the old. their speech should already self-illuminate their bright virtue, and also should serve to reach out to help others, Making it also have a way to remove the defilements of its old stains".       


"知止而后有定，定而后能靜，靜而后能安，安而后能慮，慮而后能得" - "Know the end and then you can have stability; be stable and then you can be tranquil; be tranquil and then you can be at peace; be at peace and then you can carefully think; think carefully, and then you can attain"


"止者，所當止之地，即至善之所在也"* - "That which stops is the place where one should stop, namely the location of ultimate goodness."

"古之欲明明德於天下者，先治其國；欲治其國者，先齊其家；欲齊其家者，先脩其身；欲脩其身者，先正其心；欲正其心者，先誠其意；欲誠其意者，先致其知；致知在格物" - "In ancient times, those desiring to manifest their virtue in the world first governed their own countries; those desiring to govern their countries first put their own families in order; those desiring to regulate their families first cultivated themselves; those desiring to cultivate themselves first corrected their minds; those desiring to correct their minds first embraced sincerity in their intentions; those desiring sincerity in their intentions first attained knowledge; attaining knowledge is in investigating things"

"實其心之所發，欲其一於善而無自欺也"* - "Actualize that which is emitted by the heart, desiring to be united with goodness and without self-deception."


"致，推極也。知，猶識也。推極吾之知識，欲其所知無不盡也。格，至也。物，猶事也。窮至事物之理，欲其極處無不到也。此八者，大學之條目也。"* - "Achieve, pushing to the extreme. Knowledge, similar to recognition. Pushing my knowledge to the extreme, desiring that there be nothing not thoroughly known. Arrive, to. Things, similar to affairs. Exhausting the principles of things, desiring to reach every extreme. These eight are the items of the Great Learning."


"治，去聲，後放此。物格者，物理之極處無不到也。知至者，吾心之所知無不盡也。知既盡，則意可得而實矣，意既實，則心可得而正矣。脩身以上，明明德之事也。齊家以下，新民之事也。物格知至，則知所止矣。意誠以下，則皆得所止之序也"* - "To govern, it is set aside after the departing tone. The principle of things reaches every corner of the physical world. When knowledge reaches its utmost, there is nothing my heart does not know exhaustively. When knowledge is exhausted, intent can be made real, and when intent is made real, the heart can be made upright. Cultivating oneself and beyond is the business of illuminating moral virtues. Organizing one's family and below is the business of cultivating a new generation. When the principle of things is understood to the utmost, one knows where to stop. When intent is sincere and follows below, all attains the sequence of where to stop."


"湯之盤銘曰：「苟日新，日日新，又日新。」" - "The inscription on Emperor Tang's plate conveys the idea of constant renewal or innovation, expressing the notion that if one strives for renewal every day, and this process is repeated day by day, then there is an additional layer of renewal or innovation. In summary, the message emphasizes the importance of continual improvement and innovation in daily life."

This emperour - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tang_of_Shang

"仁者以財發身，不仁者以身發財" - "The benevolent person, using wealth, develops the self; the non-benevolent person, using the self, develops wealth."

"而好學至經，功滿德就，皆得神仙，飛昇金闕，遊宴玉京也。上學之士，修誦是經，皆即受度，飛昇南宮。"

"Diligent learners who study the classics with accomplishments and virtues fulfilled will become immortals, soaring to the Golden Gate, and enjoying leisure in the Jade Capital. learners dedicated to learning, when reciting this scripture, will be saved and ascend to the Southern Palace."

"And he said, Whoever discovers what these sayings mean will not taste death"
(gospel of Thomas -  saying 1)

- Jesus offers eternal life, Unification with God is free from the undesirable aspects of this world such as death.  

"Yeshua said, Seek and do not stop seeking until you find. When you find, you will be troubled" (Gospel of Thomas -  saying 2)

- Never stop seeking the truth. Maybe the second part means the truth is troubling for the every day life and contradictory to everything we thought? 

"Here, in time, we are celebrating the eternal birth which God the Father bore and bears unceasingly in eternity, because this same birth is now born in time, in human nature. St. Augustine says, 'What does it avail me that this birth is always happening, if it does not happen in me?" (Complete mystical works of Meister Eckhart - sermon 1 Pg 29) 

- Reminds me of Romans with the renewing of one's mind. Here, Eckhart seems to be focusing less on the mind specifically but the development of one's entire being through the birth of Christ in us.

"Therefore the soul in which this birth is to take place must keep absolutely pure and must live in noble fashion, quite collected and turned entirely inward, not running out through the fi ve senses into the multiplicity of creatures, but all  inturned and collected and in the purest part there is His place; He disdains anything less." (Complete mystical works of Meister Eckhart - sermon 1 Pg 29) 

- one must stay pure in order to receive the word from the lord.

"Yet in that ground is the silent 'middle': here nothing but rest and celebration for this birth, this act, that God the Father may speak His word there, for this part is by nature receptive to nothing save only the divine essence, without mediation" (Complete mystical works of Meister Eckhart - sermon 1 Pg 31)

- The silent, inner most part of the Soul  that is receptive to God 

"Yeshua said, If your leaders tell you, "Look, the kingdom is in heaven," then the birds of heaven will precede you. 
If they say to you, "It's in the sea,"then the fish will precede you. 
But the kingdom is inside you and it is outside you. 
When you know yourselves,7 then you will be known, and you will understand that you are children of the living father. 
But if you do not know yourselves, then you dwell in poverty and you are poverty." (Gospel of Thomas - 3)

- God is directly present in a defined physical space but is all around and is within us.

"Yeshua said, A person old in days will not hesitate to ask a little child seven days old about the place of life, and the person will live. For many of the first will be last and become a single one." (Gospel of Thomas - 4)

- The young child seems to have an advantage over the man in some respects, having not yet developed a sense of self (or. Not considering itself indépendant from God) and has only just come from God 

"Yeshua said, Know what is in front of your face and what is hidden from you will be disclosed. There is nothing hidden that will not be revealed." (Gospel of Thomas - 5)

- What is Infront of your face is the Lord himself. We don't realise it and initially it is hidden but as soon as we get to know the Father, nothing is hidden from us. 

"His students asked him and said to him, Do you want us to fast? How should we pray? Should we give to charity? What diet should we observe? Yeshua said, Do not lie and do not do what you hate. All things are disclosed before heaven. There is nothing hidden that will not be revealed, nothing covered that will remain undisclosed" (Gospel of Thomas - 6)

- Seems to suggest that the foremost rule is that whatever they do, they should do it in the most genuine manner as possible 

"inwardly the soul is free and void of all means and all images - which is why God can freely unite
with her without form or likeness." (Complete mystical works of Meister Eckhart - sermon 1 Pg 31) 

- reminds me of clearing the mind of defilements in buddharma and Daoism.

"Blessings on the lion if a human eats it, making the lion human.
Foul is the human if a lion eats it, making the lion human." (Gospel of Thomas - 7)

-The passions may either be consumed by a person or consume a person (in this case the lion represents the passions 

"In the beginning was the Word" (John 1:1)

- here, Jesus is the given the alias word - he existed "In the beginning" and therefore there was nothing prior to him; Eusebius describes as such in the context of this verse: "He is the light before the world came into being, the intellectual and essential Wisdom existing before the ages". Origen also speaks of "creative wisdom present at the beginning" in relation to the word (both of these are reminiscent of stoic theology) 

"Yeshua said,
Look, the sower went out, took a handful of seeds,
and scattered them.
Some fell on the road
and the birds came and pecked them up.
Others fell on rock
and they did not take root in the soil
and did not produce heads of grain.
Others fell on thorns
and they choked the seeds
and worms devoured them. And others fell on good soil
and it brought forth a good crop,
yielding sixty per measure and one hundred twenty per measure." (Gospel of Thomas - 9) 

- The seeds of wisdom that Jesus sowed didn't all come to fruition but you should take great head of them for if you are the like the good soil, you will flourish into crop with the aid of his words


"When the powers have been completely withdrawn from all their works and images, then the Word is spoken ... If only
you could suddenly be unaware of all things, then you could pass into an oblivion of your own body"  (Complete mystical works of Meister Eckhart - sermon 1 Pg 33)

- I see what is pratically a direct paralell with daoism here  - it reminds me of the qinjinjing  - "If one can constantly dispel his desires, his heart will of itself become tranquil; if he also can make his heart limpid, his divinity will of itself become pure"

"I shall give you what no eye has seen, what no ear has heard, what no hand has touched, what has not arisen in the human heart"

- the gift of Christ is incomprehesible 


"The students said to Yeshua, Tell us how our end will be. Yeshua said, Have you discovered the beginning and now are seeking the end?
Where the beginning is, the end will be. Blessings on you who stand at the beginning. You will know the end and not taste death."

- people want to know the result of having beleief in Jesus rather than just having faith in him and beleiving in him to begin with. 

"Yeshua said, Blessings on you who came into being before coming into being. If you become my students and hear my sayings,
these stones will serve you. For there are five trees in paradise for you. Summer or winter they do not change and their leaves do not fall.
Whoever knows them will not taste death"

- We came into being with christ in eternal past when we were created by him, now we are present in a physical body ; if you listen to words of  Christ, you will receive eternal life

"This obscure family of ours was early in the Reformation,
and continued Protestants through the reign of Queen Mary,
when they were sometimes in danger of trouble on account
of their zeal against popery. They had got an English
Bible, and to conceal and secure it, it was fastened open
with tapes under and within the cover of a joint-stool."

"At his table he liked to have, as often as he could, some
sensible friend or neighbor to converse with, and always
took care to start some ingenious or useful topic for discourse, which might tend to improve the minds of his
children. By this means he turned our attention to what
was good, just, and prudent in the conduct of life; and
little or no notice was ever taken of what related to the
victuals on the table, whether it was well or ill dressed, in
or out of season, of good or bad flavor, preferable or inferior
to this or that other thing of the kind, so that I was bro't
lUp in such a perfect inattention to those matters as to be
quite indifferent what kind of food was set before me, and
so unobservant of it, that to this day if I am asked I can
scarce tell a few hours after dinner what I dined upon. This
has been a convenience to me in travelling, where my
companions have been sometimes very unhappy for want
of a suitable gratification of their more delicate, because
better instructed, tastes and appetites."
