顯正論 - https://kabc.dongguk.edu/content/view?itemId=ABC_BJ&cate=bookName&depth=3&upPath=Z&dataId=ABC_BJ_H0118_T_001
-----


所言之理旣同、而所教之迹、何以異乎。專己略人、是此非彼、人之常情
也。通人達士唯義是從。豈以人我彼此而是非者乎。使人不待爵賞之勸而
靡然從化者、三教之中、佛教能然也。蓋以吾佛大聖大慈之所感也。舜好
問而好察邇言、隱惡而揚善。禹拜昌言。若使舜禹遇佛之化、則豈不歸美
乎。而以爲不可爲修己治人之方者、亦未之思也。
曰老與儒釋、同異優劣如何。

曰、老之言曰、無爲而無不爲。當有爲而無爲。釋之言曰、寂
而常照、照而常寂。孔之言曰、夫易無思也無爲也。寂然不動、感而遂
通。夫寂然者、未嘗無感、卽寂而常照也。感通者、未嘗不寂、卽照而常
寂也。無爲而無不爲、卽寂而常感也。有爲而無所爲。卽感而常寂也。據
此則三家所言、冥相符契、而如出一口也。若履踐之高低、發用之同異、
則洗盡心垢、廓淸慧目、然後看盡大藏儒道諸書。參於日用之間、生死禍
福之際、則不待言而自點頭矣。吾何強辨以駭君聽。

If the underlying principle of the words is the same, then why should the 
outward appearances of the teachings differ? Holding stubbornly to one’s
own opinion while ignoring the positions of others, arbitrarily affirming 
this and rejecting that, this is the attitude ordinarily seen in people. The 
man of broad learning and the penetrating scholar follow only what is
right. How could they make determinations of right and wrong based on
the positions of self and other or this and that? When it comes to the task
of motivating people to surrender themselves [to the right Way] without
reliance on reward and praise, then among the three teachings, it is Buddhism that works best. It does so because people are affected by the great
holiness  and  compassion  of  our  teacher,  the  Buddha.  “[Emperor]  Shun 
liked to question people and delighted in listening to everyday speech.
He would cover over people’s bad points and disclose their goodness.”99
“Yu paid homage to the excellent words.”100 If we could have Shun and Yu
encounter  the Buddha’s  transformative  teaching, would  they not praise 
it? To say that the Buddhist teaching does not work for the cultivation of
oneself and the transformation of others is truly ridiculous!
You ask what are the points of sameness and difference and the
relative  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  Daoism,  Confucianism,  and  Buddhism. The answer is this: Laozi said “No doing and no not-doing; with 
something to do yet not-doing”;101 the Buddha said “Quiescent yet eternally luminous; luminous yet eternally quiescent”;102 Confucius said “The
 Changes have neither  thought nor  activity,  still  and unmoving  they  respond and penetrate the world.”103 Now,  this  “stillness”  that  has  never 
failed to “respond,” is the same thing as the “quiescence” that is “eternally 
luminous.” The “responding and penetrating” that has never not been
“still” is exactly the same as the “luminosity that is eternally quiescent.”
“No doing and no not-doing” is none other  than “still, yet eternally  responding.” “Eternally doing yet with nothing to be done” is none other 
than “responding yet eternally still.” If you can grasp this, then the words 
of the three teachers fit together like the pieces of the same tally—as if they 
had all come out of the same mouth! If you would like actually to demonstrate  the high  and low  among  these  teachings, exposing  their  sameness and difference in function, then you must first completely wash the 
pollution from your mind and completely clarify your eye of wisdom.
Then you can study all of the texts contained in the Buddhist, Confucian, 
and Daoist canons. Compare them in your daily activities, at the times of 
birth and death, fortune and misfortune. Without needing words, you will 
spontaneously nod in assent. How strong do I need to make my argument
to get you to listen?
