Synopsis
---------
It is a shame how little english literature there is presently on Confucianism, even more so Neo Confucianism; this great philsophical and spiritual tradition has been left relatively untouched by western scholarship and thus in this writting, the first of a series on Zhu xi's commentaries, I aim, even with my relatively limited knowledge on the topic (I am not at all a scholar), to shed some light on this neglected part of Chinese culture and Philsophy. Feel free to replicate the content in this text (and the site as whole) in whatever way you wish.    



Introduction
-------------
A short saying of Confucius -  
"學而時習之，不亦說乎？" [1] "to learn and in Time, apply it. Is that not a great pleasure ?"  

We don't have to go far, not far at all in fact, (the first line of the analects to be precise) to witness the significance Confucius places on learning  in the process of self cultivation and although this quote isn't from 大學 (the great learning, the focus of this part of Zhu Xi's collected commentaries on the four books - 四書章句集注) I felt it is very much necessary. For Confucius, learning is the start of becoming a 
君子 (Py. Junzi - meaning sage) and is what forms the basis for the rest of one's development; as we shall see next, Master Zhu explains the effect of learning from a metaphysical angle ( a key characteristic of Neo confucian thought) with concepts familiar in the philosophical/religious climate he was present in such as qi and Tian which helped to reinvigorate this learning  of Ru thought in China, and more widely east Asia.

Zhu Xi's Preface to the 大學
---------------------------------

Paragraph 1
---------------------
"古之大學所以教人之法也" - of old, the great learning of books has been the way of teaching people. 

The method of great learning has been employed in China since early times as a way of cultivation 

"蓋自天降生民 ，則既莫不與之以仁義禮智之性矣" - people descend from heaven and hence they are naturally endowed with the virtues of ren, li, justice and wisdom

These 4 virtues, known as 四端 also translated as four begginings or four seeds to reflect the proposed nature of them, that is that they are inherently inside every human is a premise emphasised particularly by Mengzi/mencius. As we can see, Zhu Xi takes this idea and expresses it in a metaphysical light - stating it was endowed by heaven.   

.however their chi is not necessarily the same, everyone doesn't posses the knowledge to fulfill their chi but with knowledge and wisdom they can actualisé it.

. heaven appoints such people with fulfilled qi and virtue to instruct / rule the masses, and will continue to choose the virtuous for this task 

. it is a matter of recovering and restoring qi 

Paragraph 2
---------------------

"三代之隆，其法寖備，然後王宮、國都以及閭巷，莫不有學" - "The three dynasties of flourishing  (Xia, Yin, Zhou) gradually perfected their ways in the districts they reigned over, no where was there not learning"

. I will certainly expand on this point when I write a commentary on the five classics but essentially, Confucius beleived that the study of historic dynasties (particularly the Zhou) and implementing their ways was essential to bringing the same prosperity of their times to his.  

"人生八歲，則自王公以下，至於庶人之子弟，皆入小學，而教之以灑掃、應對、進退之節，禮樂、射御、書數之文 ;" - When they turned eight years old, all the sons of the kings and dukes down to the common people, all entered elementary schools. They were taught the principles of mopping/cleaning, manners in conversation, and behaivour as well as the cultural arts of ritual, music, archery, charioteering, writing, and numeracy."

. In these above mentioned dynasties, everybody was well educated from a young age in a variety of subjects, starting with basic practical skills such as cleaning and manners, leading to matters of ritual (禮  py. lǐ - a very important concept in confucianism that was unserstood as actions that could acutalise one's virtue (仁 - rén))   

"及其十有五年，則自天子之元子、眾子，以至公、卿、大夫、元士之適子，與凡民之俊秀，皆入大學，而教之以窮理、正心、修己、治人之道" - "When they reach the age of fifteen, from the imperial sons and the sons of the nobility, extending to the common people with talent and intelligence, all enter the Great Learning. They are then taught how to study exhaustively, correct their thoughts, cultivate themselves and govern others"

. This is the next stage of learning that men enter at the age of 15 where they further pursue their studies with greater intensity and depth, this time learning the end goals for the way, that is, self cultivation and the way to govern others based upon the confucian philosophy. It seems to be that this stage was available to less people than the first one seen as it is only for the talented. 

"此又學校之教、大小之節所以分也" - "this was the education divided into sections (based on ages as we've seen"

Paragraph 3 
------------

"夫以學校之設，其廣如此，教之之術，其次第節目之詳又如此，而其所以為教，則又皆本之人君躬行心得之餘，不待求之民生日用彝倫之外，是以當世之人無不學" - "by means of the broad educational system, the art of teaching, its order and detailed arrangement - which is rooted in the ruler's personal practice and thorough understanding which exceeds that of the masses - ; not being beyond the lives and daily neccesities of people meaning there is no one who dosen't learn"

. In virtue of the education system and the rulers own practice, the way is not beyond the people and therefore everyone is able to learn of it.  

"其學焉者，無不有以知其性分之所固有，職分之所當為，而各俛焉以盡其力" - "of those who study, there is none who don't understand the distincitve characteristics of nature and The responsibilities they ought to fulfill ; Each bows down with diligence to exert their utmost effort

. Zhu xi advocated for observing the characteristics of nature paired with 
nurturing one’s feeling of reverence in order to purify the mind and allign oneself with the original good nature that we all posses in order to act with correct conduct [3] 

"此古昔盛時所以治隆於上，俗美於下，而非後世之所能及也！" - "In ancient times during prosperous eras, the governance flourished above, and the conditions of the common people were beautiful below"

. I think it is necessary here to note the view that Confucius held on the ruler's influence on people ; for Confucius, the ruler had to simply display his own virtue outwardly and this in itslef would bring virtue and hence prosperity to his people below him ; Confucius gives an analogy of wind passing over grass, stating that just as the wind naturally bends the grass as it passes over it so does the virtue of the ruler naturally bend his people towards it [4]

Paragraph 4
-----------
"及周之衰，賢聖之君不作，學校之政不修，教化陵夷，風俗頹敗，時則有若孔子之聖，而不得君師之位以行其政教，於是獨取先王之法，誦而傳之以詔後世" - "During the decline of the Zhou dynasty, virtuous and sage rulers did not emerge. The governance of education and schools was neglected, and the teachings and culture were in decline. At such times, there were individuals resembling the wisdom of Confucius, yet they could not attain the position of rulers to implement their political and educational ideals At that time, they independently adopted the laws of the ancient kings, reciting and transmitting them as instructions for future generations."

. Having seen the great effect that confucianism has on the kingdom, we now see the inverse: in the abscence of virtuous rulers following the way and the general populace learning the way, the kingdom is sure to decline 

"若曲禮、少儀、內則、弟子職諸篇，固小學之支流餘裔，而此篇者，則因小學之成功，以著大學之明法，外有以極其規模之大，而內有以盡其節目之詳者也" - "If one examines the various writings on music, ritual, minor ceremonies, and the duties of students, these indeed represent the peripheral branches and descendants of the study of minor learning [taught to children of nobles]. However, this particular text, owing to the achievements of minor learning, serves to establish the clear principles of the great learning. Externally, it seeks to explore the grand scale of it, while internally, it aims to exhaustively elaborate on its detailed aspects."

. since this is all part of Zhu Xi's introduction to the great learning, he begins to explain what the text conatins, namely how it expands on the level learning that follows the first level of education taught to children.

"三千之徒，蓋莫不聞其說，而曾氏之傳獨得其宗，於是作為傳義，以發其意" - "The disciples numbering three thousand, indeed all have heard his teachings. However, it is only the transmission of the Zengzi that truly captures its essence. Therefore, a commentary is written to explain and elucidate its meaning"

. The great learning is attributed to confucius' immediate disciple Zengzi  

"及孟子沒而其傳泯焉，則其書雖存，而知者鮮矣！" - "When Mencius passed away and his teachings were lost, even though his writings exist, there are few who understand"

. Mencius was another early confucian writer who also wrote one of the four books, known simply as the Mencius (孟子 py. Mengzi). this sentence paired with the previous, stating 'there are few who understand' , and 'a commentary is written to explain and elucidate its meaning' display the profoundess of the way and how difficult it is to comprehend.    

Paragraph 5
------------
"自是以來，俗儒記誦詞章之習，其功倍於小學而無用；異端虛無寂滅之教，其高過於大學而無實" - "Since then, people have doubled their efforts in the common Confucian practice of memorizing phrases and sentences compared to elementary learning, yet it is useless; the heterodox teachings of emptiness and extinction surpass the heights of the Great Learning, yet lack substance"

. here Zhu Xi is explaining how people have gone beyond the method of great learning yet these methods are really quite useless.

"其他權謀術數，一切以就功名之說，與夫百家眾技之流，所以惑世誣民、充塞仁義者，又紛然雜出乎其閒" - "Other political stratergies and schemes all for the sake of achieving merit and fame, and the myriad skills of the hundred schools, therefore confusing the world, deceiving the people, and blocking up ren. Moreover, arising chaotically in their free time."

. building on the last point, Zhu Xi explains how these different pratices that differ from the original confucian teachings have lead to the confusing of the people and ultimately a loss of ren overall 

"使其君子不幸而不得聞大道之要，其小人不幸而不得蒙至治之澤，晦盲否塞，反覆沈痼，以及五季之衰，而壞亂極矣！" - "Causing sages to be unfortunate and unable to hear the essentials of the Great way, those of little capacities to be unfortunate and unable to receive the blessings of perfect rule, obscure and ignorant, obstructed and blocked, repeatedly sinking into affliction and illness, as well as the decline of the five seasons, resulting in extreme ruin and chaos"

- once again, emphasising previous points on the issue of trying other methods rather then than the orthodox one of great learning

Paragraph 6
-----------
"天運循環，無往不復。宋德隆盛，治教休明。於是河南程氏兩夫子出，而有以接乎孟氏之傳" - "The will of heaven goes and comes back around; there is nowhere it does not regain possession. During the flourishing era of the Song Dynasty, governance and education were splendid and clear. Then, the two masters of the Cheng family (known as the Cheng brothers) in Henan emerged, and there was a way to receive the transmission from mengzi"

The will of heaven / mandate of heaven (天命) was a reiligious and political idea that existed in China since ancient times, it was the theory that the soveriegn was appointed by heaven according to his conduct and the experience of the people under his rule ; if the ruler was virtuous, the opinion of heaven would be manifested in desirable natural circumstances such as good weather for good harvest ; if the ruler was unvirtuous however, undesirable phenomena would occur such as natural disatsers. This links in with Zhu Xi's statement here because he is saying that heaven has in the end restored righteous circumstances and rule to the song dynasty after the afore mentioned periods of catastrophe The cheng brothers were two philosopers that helped to pioneer what we know today as neo confucinism, their thought heavily influenced Zhu Xi. With the flourishing of the song dynasty and the presence of these new thinkers, the teachings from mengzi's writings could now be correctly understood (note earlier statement in the text when Zhu xi said that few undertsood what Zhu xi meant.

"實始尊信此篇而表章之，既又為之次其簡編，發其歸趣，然後古者大學教人之法、聖經賢傳之指，粲然復明於世" - "Truly, [the ancient] starts by respecting and believing in this passage, presenting it as a chapter. Having already arranged it, he again edits its simple compilation, expressing its intent. Afterwards, the ancients' method of teaching people in the Great Learning, along with the guidance and instructions of the Sacred Scriptures and Wise Transmission, brightly illuminates once again in the world."

. Zhu xi explains how the ancients have compiled the great learning into a small passage and how the method of teaching the way of great learning has shone brightly again in the world ie. come into prominence 

"雖以熹之不敏，亦幸私淑而與有聞焉" - "Although I am not wise, it is fortunate that I privately studied and thus possess knowledge

. Zhu Xi showing humility, believing that his own knowledge is lacking but at the same time, he was able to teach himself by studying.

"顧其為書猶頗放失，是以忘其固陋，采而輯之，閒亦竊附己意，補其闕略，以俟後之君子" - "Looking at the book [the great learning], there are still some areas that appear misinterpreted / neglected. Therefore, forgetting narrow-mindedness, I gather and organise it. Occasionally, I also secretly incorporate my own thoughts, supplementing and omitting [some thoughts / commentary], awaiting the arrival of later sages."

. Zhu Xi explains how he will intepret the text and build on the original in which it is typically interpreted, he will still away from the rigid traditional view on the book and instead, add his own thoughts to help supplement its meaning.

"極知僭踰，無所逃罪，然於國家化民成俗之意、學者修己治人之方，則未必無小補云" - "I am Extremely aware of overstepping boundaries, at which poimt there is no way to escape guilt. However, in the intention of transforming the nation and forming customs among the people, the method by which scholars cultivate themselves and govern others, the writing won't be without small supplements"

.Zhu Xi knows that there is a point at which interpretation has gone too far beyond the original meaning of the text but at the same time, he wishes for his thoughts to influence and transfom the customs of the people, the way scholars cultivate themselves and the state as a whole so his commentary won't be without at least some complements to the original text.

"淳熙己酉春二月申子，新安朱熹序" - "In the spring of the second month of the year Jiyou in the Shenzi reign, Zhu Xi's preface from Xinan" 

Jiyou was the 46th year of the sexegenary cycle used to record time in China. Shenzi refers to the chinese astrological sign of the monkey (9th sign of the 12 year system) and Xinan was the name of a Place west of present day Luoyang city, Henan province. 

Zhu Xi's Commentary on the 大學
-------------------------------
note. Zhu Xi's aditions will be put with a * by the text 

"大，舊音泰，今讀如字"* - "The character '大' originally had an old pronunciation of 泰 (tài), but nowadays it is pronounced as it is written" 

"子程子曰：「大學，孔氏之遺書，而初學入德之門也"* - "Master Cheng said, 'The Great Learning is the legacy writings of Confucius, and it is the gateway for entering the way of virtue at the beginning of learning.'"

"」於今可見古人為學次第者，獨賴此篇之存，而論、孟次之"* - "In the present, it can be seen that the ancients, in their pursuit of learning, relied solely on the existence of this text, and they ranked it higher than the analects and the Mengzi."

"學者必由是而學焉，則庶乎其不差矣"* - "Scholars must necessarily learn through this way in order to avoid errors."

Zhu Xi is clealy emphasising here how important the great learning is, stating that it was held higher than other works of the 4 books such as the analects and mengzi ; it is the gateway to 德 (dé - virtue) in the pursuit of learning

Paragraph 1 
-----------
"大學之道，在明明德，在親民，在止於至善" - "the way of great learning is to actualise illustrious virtue, to love the people and to rest in the highest excellence" 

. The way of great learning is not merely an intellectual pursuit to method to reach true goodness of character

"程子曰：「親，當作新"* - "Master Cheng said 'one should renew oneself"

"大學者，大人之學也"* - "The Great Learning is the learning of the one of high virtue".

"明，明之也"* - "clear, indeed it is clear" 

"明德者，人之所得乎天，而虛靈不昧，以具眾理而應萬事者也"* - "As for one with clear virtue, it is what they obtain from heaven, and the numinous emptiness is not obscured; it is because one possesses The principle of the myriad phenomena which is non different to all things."

The term 虛靈 (xūlíng) was used by Zhu Xi to describe attributes of the mind that is, empty (虛) and spirit (靈). Begining with the former, we can understand 'empty' with the analogy of a mirror (many neo-confucian scholars use this explanation) ; a mirror that is reflecting no object is empty and it is also this inherent emptiness that allows to reflect objects in the first place, likwise is the human mind empty in its original state therefore it can encounter and accept external objects. 'Spirit' is considered a seperate property of the mind ; with the same analogy: although it is inherently empty, the essence of a mirror can be said to depend on its function of reflecting objects and this essence is the actual action of the mind interacting with external objects.  虛靈 is considered to be an attribute that only the human mind posseses (ie. animals don't have it) since animals don't have the ability to discern right from wrong or investiagte the fundamental principles behind things. It was also taught that 靈 arised from the combination of li and qi or for those who held that the mind was constituted of purely qi only, they insisted that the 'spirit' aspect of the mind arised from the uniqueness of the heart itself, which is the clearest and most precise part of the qi. [5]        


"但為氣稟所拘，人欲所蔽，則有時而昏；然其本體之明，則有未嘗息者"* - "yet bound by an endowed disposition, and obstructed by desires, there are times when [the mind] is confused. However, its original state is clear; there has never been a moment of stillness."

"故學者當因其所發而遂明之，以復其初也。新者，革其舊之謂也，言既自明其明德，又當推以及人，使之亦有以去其舊染之污也"* - "Therefore, learners should understand it according to what arises from it, thereby restoring its original state. The new is what is called the replacement of the old. their speech should already self-illuminate their bright virtue, and also should serve to reach out to help others, Making it also have a way to remove the defilements of its old stains".       

"止者，必至於是而不遷之意"* - "he one who ceases, certainly must arrive at this point, but without changing their mind"

"至善，則事理當然之極也。言明明德、新民，皆當至於至善之地而不遷"* - "When it comes to ultimate goodness, the underlying, connecting principle is naturally at its highest. Speaking to elucidate clear virtues and renweing people, all should arrive at the place of ultimate goodness without moving."

"蓋必其有以盡夫天理之極，而無一毫人欲之私也。此三者，大學之綱領也"* - "Indeed, these must be a means to exhaust the utmost of heavenly principles, devoid of even a trace of desire. These three constitute the essential principles of the Great Learning.



"知止而后有定，定而后能靜，靜而后能安，安而后能慮，慮而后能得" - "Know the end and then you can have stability; be stable and then you can be tranquil; be tranquil and then you can be at peace; be at peace and then you can carefully think; think carefully, and then you can attain"

"后，與後同，後放此"* - "Afterward, the same, placed here"

"止者，所當止之地，即至善之所在也"* - "That which stops is the place where one should stop, namely the location of ultimate goodness."

"知之，則志有定向"* - "Knowing, then the will has a fixed direction."

"靜，謂心不妄動"* - "Stillness means the mind does not move recklessly."

"安，謂所處而安"* - "Tranquility refers to being situated in a peaceful state."

"慮，謂處事精詳"* - "Consideration means dealing with matters meticulously and in detail

"得，謂得其所止"* - "Obtainment, it is said, is to obtain its stopping point"

"物有本末，事有終始，知所先後，則近道矣" - "Things have their roots and branches, affairs have their end and beginning. Know the order of priorities, and then one is close to the Dao (the Way)."

"明德為本，新民為末"* - "Clear virtue serves as the foundation, while new people serve as the end"

"知止為始，能得為終"* - "To know when to stop is the beginning; to be able to obtain is the end"

"本始所先，末終所後"* - "The fundamental origin is what precedes, and the final outcome is what follows." 

"此結上文兩節之意"* - "This concludes the meaning of the two sections in the preceding text"

"古之欲明明德於天下者，先治其國；欲治其國者，先齊其家；欲齊其家者，先脩其身；欲脩其身者，先正其心；欲正其心者，先誠其意；欲誠其意者，先致其知；致知在格物" - "In ancient times, those desiring to manifest their virtue in the world first governed their own countries; those desiring to govern their countries first put their own families in order; those desiring to regulate their families first cultivated themselves; those desiring to cultivate themselves first corrected their minds; those desiring to correct their minds first embraced sincerity in their intentions; those desiring sincerity in their intentions first attained knowledge; attaining knowledge is in investigating things"

"治，平聲，後放此"* - "afterwards, let this go"

"明明德於天下者，使天下之人皆有以明其明德也"* - "Clearly manifesting virtue in the world, causing the people of the world to each have a way to manifest their clear virtue."

"心者，身之所主也"* - "The mind is the master of the body"

"誠，實也。意者，心之所發也"* - "Sincerity is synonymous with truthfulness. It refers to the thoughts and intentions that emanate from the heart" 

"實其心之所發，欲其一於善而無自欺也"* - "Actualize that which is emitted by the heart, desiring to be united with goodness and without self-deception."

"致，推極也。知，猶識也。推極吾之知識，欲其所知無不盡也。格，至也。物，猶事也。窮至事物之理，欲其極處無不到也。此八者，大學之條目也。"* - "Achieve, pushing to the extreme. Knowledge, similar to recognition. Pushing my knowledge to the extreme, desiring that there be nothing not thoroughly known. Arrive, to. Things, similar to affairs. Exhausting the principles of things, desiring to reach every extreme. These eight are the items of the Great Learning."

"物格而后知至，知至而后意誠，意誠而后心正，心正而后身脩，身脩而后家齊，家齊而后國治，國治而后天下平" - "After distinguishing things, knowledge is achieved. After knowledge reaches, intentions become sincere. With sincere intentions, the mind becomes upright. With an upright mind, the body is cultivated. With a cultivated body, the family becomes orderly. With an orderly family, the nation is governed. With a governed nation, the world becomes peaceful."

"治，去聲，後放此。物格者，物理之極處無不到也。知至者，吾心之所知無不盡也。知既盡，則意可得而實矣，意既實，則心可得而正矣。脩身以上，明明德之事也。齊家以下，新民之事也。物格知至，則知所止矣。意誠以下，則皆得所止之序也"* - "To govern, it is set aside after the departing tone. The principle of things reaches every corner of the physical world. When knowledge reaches its utmost, there is nothing my heart does not know exhaustively. When knowledge is exhausted, intent can be made real, and when intent is made real, the heart can be made upright. Cultivating oneself and beyond is the business of illuminating moral virtues. Organizing one's family and below is the business of cultivating a new generation. When the principle of things is understood to the utmost, one knows where to stop. When intent is sincere and follows below, all attains the sequence of where to stop."

"自天子以至於庶人，壹是皆以脩身為本" - "From the Son of Heaven to the common people, all are with cultivating oneself as the foundation"

"壹是，一切也。正心以上，皆所以脩身也。齊家以下，則舉此而措之耳"* - "One is all. Rectify the mind above; all is therefore for cultivating oneself. Harmonize the family below; then apply this and manage it."

"其本亂而末治者否矣，其所厚者薄，而其所薄者厚，未之有也！" - "Its foundation is in chaos, and those in charge at the end are certainly not effective. What it values is insignificant, and what it neglects is substantial; there has never been such a case!"

"本，謂身也。所厚，謂家也。此兩節結上文兩節之意"* - "The term 'root' refers to oneself, and what is profound pertains to the family. These two statements connect with the meaning of the preceding two statements in the text."

"右經一章，蓋孔子之言，而曾子述之" - "In the Classics, there is one section. Indeed, these are the words of Confucius, and Zengzi has explained them"

"凡二百五字"* - "Every fool's words."

"其傳十章，則曾子之意而門人記之也。舊本頗有錯簡，今因程子所定，而更考經文，別為序次如左" - "Its transmission consists of ten chapters. Then, it is Zengzi's intention, and his disciples have recorded it. Old versions have quite a few errors and omissions. Now, based on what Master Cheng has determined, and further examining the classical texts, a different order is established as follows." 

"凡千五百四十六字。凡傳文，雜引經傳，若無統紀，然文理接續，血脈貫通，深淺始終，至為精密。熟讀詳味，久當見之，今不盡釋也。"* - "In total, there are 1546 characters. In transmitted texts, with various references to classics and commentaries, if there is no systematic organization, but the textual logic is coherent, the main thread permeates through, and the depth and shallowness are consistent from start to finish, it becomes exceedingly meticulous. With familiar reading and detailed understanding, one will eventually see it after a long time. As of now, it is not entirely explained."

Paragraph 2 
-----------

"康誥曰：「克明德。」" - "The Announcement of Kang says: 'To overcome and be bright in virtue.'"

"康誥，周書。克，能也"* - "The Edict of Kang, recorded in the Zhou Book. '克' means the capability or ability."

"大甲曰：「顧諟天之明命。」" - "Dajia said, 'Considering the clear commands of heaven.'"

"大，讀作泰。諟，古是字。大甲，商書。顧，謂常目在之也。諟，猶此也，或曰審也。天之明命，即天之所以與我，而我之所以為德者也。常目在之，則無時不明矣。"* - "大 is read as 泰. 諟 is an ancient character. Great armor is found in the Shang dynasty's writings. 顧 means constantly looking at it. 諟 is like this; some say it means careful examination. The clear command of heaven is the means by which heaven grants to me, and it is the reason by which I become virtuous. Always looking at it, there is no time when it is not clear."

"帝典曰：「克明峻德。」" - "The emperor or deity in the classics says: 'Overcome brightness, tower in virtue.'"

"峻，書作俊。帝典，堯典，虞書。峻，大也"* - "Majestic, the books are made to be excellent. Imperial classics, Yao's classics, and Yu's writings are majestic and great."

"皆自明也" - "All are self-evident" 

"結所引書，皆言自明己德之意"* - "Concluding the cited texts, all express the intention of making clear one's own virtue."

"右傳之首章。釋明明德" - "The opening chapter of the Zuo Zhuan, providing an explanation that elucidates clear and bright moral virtue."

"此通下三章至「止於信」，舊本誤在「沒世不忘」之下"* - "The interpretation of this [commentary] covers the next three chapters until 'stops at faith,' and the old edition mistakenly placed [it] below 'unforgettable." 

Paragraph 3
------------

"湯之盤銘曰：「苟日新，日日新，又日新。」" - "The inscription on Emperor Tang's plate conveys the idea of constant renewal or innovation, expressing the notion that if one strives for renewal every day, and this process is repeated day by day, then there is an additional layer of renewal or innovation. In summary, the message emphasizes the importance of continual improvement and innovation in daily life."

"盤，沐浴之盤也。銘，名其器以自警之辭也。苟，誠也。湯以人之洗濯其心以去惡，如沐浴其身以去垢。故銘其盤，言誠能一日有以滌其舊染之汙而自新，則當因其已新者，而日日新之，又日新之，不可略有間斷也"* - "The basin is for bathing. Engrave the vessel with a self-admonishing phrase. If sincere, use hot water to cleanse the heart of evil, just as bathing the body removes dirt. Therefore, inscribe on the basin, saying that if one is sincerely able to cleanse the old stains and impurities of the heart in a day, and renew oneself, then one should, because of the already renewed, renew it daily and again daily, without any slight interruption."

"康誥曰：「作新民。」" -  "The Kang Gao says: 'Create a new people.'"

"鼓之舞之之謂作，言振起其自新之民也"* - "Drum it, dance it – that is called doing or making. It speaks of arousing and raising its self-renewing people."

"詩曰：「周雖舊邦，其命惟新。」" - "The poetry says: 'Although the Zhou dynasty is an old state, its destiny is only new.'"

"詩大雅文王之篇。言周國雖舊，至於文王，能新其德以及於民，而始受天命也"* - "The poetry is grand and elegant, belonging to the chapters of King Wen. It is said that although the Zhou state is ancient, it reaches up to King Wen, who can renew his virtue and be among the people, and thus begins to receive the Mandate of Heaven."

"是故君子無所不用其極" - "Therefore, a noble person (gentleman) does not refrain from using [things] to the utmost."


"自新新民，皆欲止於至善也"* - "The self-renewed new people, all desire to reach the ultimate goodness."

"右傳之二章。釋新民" - "Regarding the two chapters of the 'Right Commentary': Explaining the new people."

Paragraph 4 
-----------
"詩云：「邦畿千里，惟民所止。」" - "The poem states: 'The capital region extends for a thousand miles, only where the people reside.'"

"詩商頌玄鳥之篇。邦畿，王者之都也。止，居也，言物各有所當止之處也"* - "In the poetry, there is a section that praises the mysterious bird. The borders of the state are the capital of the ruler. Stopping and residing, it speaks of each thing having its appropriate place to stop"

"詩云：「緡蠻黃鳥，止于丘隅。」子曰：「於止，知其所止，可以人而不如鳥乎！」" - "The poem describes a colorful bird perched on the corner of a hill. Confucius remarked that in the act of stopping and understanding where to draw limits, can humans match the instinctual wisdom exhibited by birds?"

"緡，詩作綿。詩小雅綿蠻之篇。緡蠻，鳥聲。丘隅，岑蔚之處。子曰以下，孔子說詩之辭。言人當知所當止之處也"* - "Mǐn, in poetry, is used to make it delicate. In poetry, there are delicate and wild pieces in the Small Elegance category. Delicate and wild, like the sound of birds, in the corners of hills, in places with dense vegetation. Confucius said the following, explaining the words of poetry. He said that people should know where they should stop speaking."

"詩云：「穆穆文王，於緝熙敬止！」為人君，止於仁；為人臣，止於敬；為人子，止於孝；為人父，止於慈；與國人交，止於信" - "The poem says: 'Respectful and awe-inspiring King Wen, in meticulous splendor, with reverence and restraint!' When serving as a ruler, one should confine oneself to benevolence; as a minister or subject, to respect; as a son, to filial piety; as a father, to kindness; and in dealings with fellow citizens, to trustworthiness."

"於緝之於，音烏。詩文王之篇。穆穆，深遠之意。於，歎美辭。緝，繼續也。熙，光明也。敬止，言其無不敬而安所止也。引此而言聖人之止，無非至善。五者乃其目之大者也。學者於此，究其精微之蘊，而又推類以盡其餘，則於天下之事，皆有以知其所止而無疑矣"* - "In the pronunciation of '於', it resembles the sound of a crow. The chapters of King Wen's poetry and literature are solemn, expressing profound meanings. '於' denotes admiration for beautiful language, while '緝' signifies continuation. '熙' and '光明' represent brightness and radiance, while '敬止' refers to a respectful stop, where there is no disrespect and a sense of peace. Speaking of this, the sage's stop embodies nothing but the utmost goodness. These five aspects are the greatest focus. Scholars, by thoroughly studying their subtle essence and extending their understanding, can comprehend all affairs under heaven without doubt."

"詩云：「瞻彼淇澳，菉竹猗猗。有斐君子，如切如磋，如琢如磨。瑟兮僩兮，赫兮喧兮。有斐君子，終不可諠兮！」如切如磋者，道學也；如琢如磨者，自脩也；瑟兮僩兮者，恂慄也；赫兮喧兮者，威儀也；有斐君子，終不可諠兮者，道盛德至善，民之不能忘也" - "The poem speaks of the picturesque Qi Bay with lush reeds. An outstanding noble person is likened to continuous refinement, self-cultivation, caution, and dignified bearing. Despite these virtues, true nobility does not boast excessively. This is because the Dao is flourishing, virtue is complete, and the impact on the people is unforgettable"

"澳，於六反。菉，詩作綠。猗，協韻音阿。僩，下版反。喧，詩作咺，諠，詩作諼；並況晚反。恂，鄭氏讀作峻。詩衛風淇澳之篇。淇，水名。澳，隈也。猗猗，美盛貌。興也。斐，文貌。切以刀鋸，琢以椎鑿，皆裁物使成形質也。磋以鑢鐋1，磨以沙石，皆治物使其滑澤也。治骨角者，既切而復磋之。治玉石者，既琢而復磨之。皆言其治之有緒，而益致其精也。瑟，嚴密之貌。僩，武毅之貌。赫喧，宣著盛大之貌。諠，忘也。道，言也。學，謂講習討論之事，自脩者，省察克治之功。恂慄，戰懼也。威，可畏也。儀，可象也。引詩而釋之，以明明明德者之止於至善。道學自脩，言其所以得之之由。恂慄、威儀，言其德容表裏之盛。卒乃指其實而歎美之也"* - "At the sixth turn, 'Lù' in poetry is written as 'green,' and 'Yī' coordinates with the rhyme sound 'ā.' 'Xiàn' is a variant form indicating obstruction downward. 'Xuān' in poetry can be written as 'xuān' or 'xuān,' and consider the reverse for 'wǎn.' 'Xún,' when read by the Zheng family, is pronounced as 'jùn.' The poem 'Qí Ào' in the Wèifēng category of the Book of Songs describes the river 'Qí' and a secluded corner 'ào,' both symbolizing a gracefully flourishing and beautiful appearance, signifying flourishing and elegance in literary appearance. It also describes the meticulous processes of cutting, carving, polishing with files and tools, and grinding with sand and stones, all aimed at shaping and treating things to achieve smoothness and gloss. Similarly, in treating bones and horns, after cutting, they are polished again. One who works on jade and stones, after carving, polishes them again. All acknowledge that this work has a method, leading to an enhancement of its essence. The appearances of dignified meticulousness, martial vigor, grandeur, and forgetfulness are described. 'Dao' is equated with speech, and 'learning' refers to the activities of discussion and learning. For those who cultivate themselves, it means examining and mastering the practice of virtue. 'Trembling in fear,' 'awe-inspiring,' and 'worthy of emulation' describe the demeanor. Quoting poetry to clarify that those with clear virtues adhere to the highest goodness. Cultivating oneself in the Dao and learning, speaking of the ways through which one attains it. 'Trembling and awe-inspiring demeanor' speaks of the abundance of virtue both internally and externally. Finally, pointing to its reality and praising its beauty" 

"詩云：「於戲前王不忘！」君子賢其賢而親其親，小人樂其樂而利其利，此以沒世不忘也" - "The poetry emphasizes that even before engaging in recreational activities, a wise ruler does not forget his responsibilities. A noble person values the virtuous and is close to family, while a petty person prioritizes personal pleasure and self-interest. These principles endure throughout generations and are not forgotten"

"於戲，音嗚呼。樂，音洛。詩周頌烈文之篇。於戲，歎辭。前王，謂文、武也。君子，謂其後賢後王。小人，謂後民也。此言前王所以新民者止於至善，能使天下後世無一物不得其所，所以既沒世而人思慕之，愈久而不忘也。此兩節詠歎淫泆，其味深長，當熟玩之"* - "In the realm of entertainment, the sound is joyous. Music, with the sound of luò, is akin to the splendid literary pieces in the poetry of the Zhou Songs. In the context of play, there is an expression of deep emotions and lamentations. The term 'former kings' refers to those who embodied both civil and military virtues. 'Gentlemen' refers to virtuous individuals and future kings, while 'small people' denotes the commoners in later generations. This passage conveys that the former kings, through their pursuit of ultimate goodness, ensured that everything in the world of later generations found its proper place. As a result, even after their passing, people continue to think about and admire them, and this admiration deepens over time. These two lines express admiration and deep emotions about the profound and lasting impact of the former kings' virtuous influence, encouraging readers to carefully appreciate and savor the sentiments conveyed." 

"右傳之三章。釋止於至善" - "The three chapters of the Zuo Zhuan. The explanation concludes at the ultimate goodness." 

"此章內自引淇澳詩以下，舊本誤在誠意章下"* - "In this chapter, starting from the citation of the poem from Qimao onwards, there is a mistake in the old edition below the chapter on sincerity."

"1. 鐋 : 原作「鍚」。《摛藻堂四庫全書薈要》本作「鐋」"* - "1. 鐋: Originally written as '鍚'. In the 'Essential Collection of the Siku Quanshu at the Chisao Hall,' it is written as '鐋'."

Paragraph 5
-----------

"子曰：「聽訟，吾猶人也，必也使無訟乎！」無情者不得盡其辭。大畏民志，此謂知本" - "Listening to lawsuits, I am still just a human; certainly, I must make it so that there are no lawsuits! Those without feeling cannot fully present their arguments. Great is the fear of the will of the people; this is called knowing the root" 

"猶人，不異於人也。情，實也。引夫子之言，而言聖人能使無實之人不敢盡其虛誕之辭。蓋我之明德既明，自然有以畏服民之心志，故訟不待聽而自無也。觀於此言，可以知本末之先後矣"* - "Similar to humans, not different from them. Feelings are indeed real. Quoting the words of Confucius, it is said that the sage has the ability to make those without genuine substance refrain from fully expressing their empty and deceptive words. Indeed, my clear moral integrity naturally has the means to awe and gain the submission of the hearts and minds of the people. Therefore, disputes need not be heard; they naturally cease to exist. Considering this statement, one can understand the prioritization of the fundamental and the incidental."

"右傳之四章。釋本末" - The four chapters of the commentary, explaining the origin and conclusion

"此章舊本誤在「止於信」下"* - ""In this chapter, the old edition is mistakenly located below '止於信.'"

Paragraph 6
-----------

"此謂知本，" - "This means to know the origin,"

"程子曰：「衍文也。」"* - "Cheng Zi said: 'Elaborative text.'"

"此謂知之至也" - "This is called knowledge, the ultimate understanding."

"此句之上別有闕文，此特其結語耳"* - "Above this sentence, there is missing text that is different; especially pay attention to its concluding words."

"右傳之五章，蓋釋格物、致知之義，而今亡矣" - "The fifth chapter of the Righteousness Annals indeed explained the principles of understanding things and the significance of attaining knowledge, but now it has been lost or is no longer available."

"此章舊本通下章，誤在經文之下"* - "This chapter connects to the next chapter in the old editions, with an error found below the classic text"

"閒嘗竊取程子之意以補之曰：「所謂致知在格物者，言欲致吾之知，在即物而窮其理也。蓋人心之靈莫不有知，而天下之物莫不有理，惟於理有未窮，故其知有不盡也。是以大學始教，必使學者即凡天下之物，莫不因其已知之理而益窮之，以求至乎其極。至於用力之久，而一旦豁然貫通焉，則眾物之表裏精粗無不到，而吾心之全體大用無不明矣。此謂物格，此謂知之至也。」" - " In my idle moments, I have secretly borrowed the thoughts of Cheng Yi to supplement them, saying: What is called the attainment of knowledge lies in examining things, desiring the attainment of my knowledge, is in the very things and exhausting their principles. For there is no exception that the spiritual aspect of the human mind has knowledge, and without exception, all things under heaven have principles, except that in principles, there are some not yet exhausted, therefore, its knowledge is not exhaustive. Therefore, the Great Learning begins to teach, must make learners immediately encompass all things under heaven, without exception, relying on the principles already known and further exhausting them, in order to seek to the utmost limit. Until applying effort for a long time, and suddenly, it becomes clear and open, penetrated, then every aspect of all things, their fineness and coarseness, nothing is not reached, and the entirety of my heart's great utility, nothing is not clear."




Paragraph 7
-----------

"所謂誠其意者：毋自欺也，如惡惡臭，如好好色，此之謂自謙，故君子必慎其獨也！"  - " What is meant by being sincere in one's intention is not to deceive oneself, like hating a foul smell and loving lustful desires. This is what is called self-modesty. Therefore, a gentleman must be cautious when alone"

"惡、好上字，皆去聲。謙讀為慊，苦劫反。誠其意者，自脩之首也。毋者，禁止之辭。自欺云者，知為善以去惡，而心之所發有未實也。謙，快也，足也。獨者，人所不知而己所獨知之地也。言欲自脩者知為善以去其惡，則當實用其力，而禁止其自欺。使其惡惡則如惡惡臭，好善則如好好色，皆務決去，而求必得之，以自快足於己，不可徒苟且以殉1外而為人也。然其實與不實，蓋有他人所不及知而己獨知之者，故必謹之於此以審其幾焉"* - "The characters for "evil" and "good" both have the departing tone. Humility in reading leads to contentment; bitterness and calamity will return. Sincerity of intention is the beginning of self-cultivation. "Do not" is the expression of prohibition and restraint. Those who deceive themselves claim to know goodness to eliminate evil, but what the heart emits is not yet real. Humility is joy and sufficiency. Alone is the place where people do not know, but oneself uniquely knows. Those desiring self-cultivation through speech should know to do good and eliminate evil. Then, they should genuinely apply their strength and restrain self-deception. Make evil stink like the stench of evil and goodness appear as the attractiveness of goodness. Strive to decisively eliminate both, and seek to surely obtain them. By this, bring joy and sufficiency to oneself, not merely casually sacrificing oneself for external appearances and others. However, in reality and unreality, indeed there are things that others may not know, and one alone knows. Therefore, one must be cautious about it, examining how much is there in this."  

"小人閒居為不善，無所不至，見君子而后厭然，揜其不善，而著其善。人之視己，如見其肺肝然，則何益矣。此謂誠於中，形於外，故君子必慎其獨也" - "A small-minded person, living idly, engages in immoral actions, stopping at nothing in their wrongdoing. When they see a virtuous person, they feel disgusted, hiding their immorality while emphasizing their virtues. People regard themselves as if seeing their innermost thoughts and feelings, but what is the use of it? This is called sincerity within and manifestation on the outside. Therefore, a person of virtue must be cautious when alone."

"閒，音閑。厭，鄭氏讀為黶。閒居，獨處也。厭然，消沮閉藏之貌。此言小人陰為不善，而陽欲揜之，則是非不知善之當為與惡之當去也；但不能實用其力以至此耳。然欲揜其惡而卒不可揜，欲詐為善而卒不可詐，則亦何益之有哉！此君子所以重以為戒，而必謹其獨也"* - "閒, pronounced as xián, is suggested to be read as 黶 by the Zheng family. 閒居 means dwelling leisurely, i.e., being alone or in solitude. 厭然 describes a look of disdain, an appearance of diminishing, being disheartened, and concealing. This passage discusses how petty individuals engage in wrongdoing secretly, yet outwardly attempt to cover it up. While they understand the difference between right and wrong, they fail to effectively rectify their behavior. The text emphasizes the futility of trying to cover up wrongdoing or deceitfully appear virtuous without success, posing a rhetorical question about the benefits of such endeavors. In contrast, it suggests that noble individuals consider this as a warning and exercise caution when alone."

"曾子曰：「十目所視，十手所指，其嚴乎！」" - "Zeng Zi said, 'The ten eyes gaze upon, the ten hands point to, how strict it is!'"

"引此以明上文之意。言雖幽獨之中，而其善惡之不可揜如此。可畏之甚也"* - "By this, clarify the meaning of the preceding text. Although the words are within seclusion, yet its good and evil cannot be concealed like this. It is extremely worthy of awe."

"富潤屋，德潤身，心廣體胖，故君子必誠其意" - "Wealth enriches the house, virtue enriches the body. With a broad mind, the body becomes robust. Therefore, a true gentleman must be sincere in his intentions."

"胖，步丹反。胖，安舒也。言富則能潤屋矣，德則能潤身矣，故心無愧怍，則廣大寬平，而體常舒泰，德之潤身者然也。蓋善之實於中而形於外者如此，故又言此以結之。"* - "Plumpness results from a swaying walk, signifying peace and comfort. Words of wealth can nourish one's house, and virtue can nourish one's body. Therefore, with a heart free from shame and embarrassment, one becomes broad, wide, and level, and the body is always relaxed and peaceful—such is the nourishment of virtue for the body. Indeed, goodness is inherent within and manifests itself outwardly. Therefore, these words are spoken to conclude it."

"右傳之六章。釋誠意" - "Explaining the Sincere Intentions within the Six Chapters of the Commentary to the Right."

"經曰：「欲誠其意，先致其知。」又曰：「知至而后意誠。」蓋心體之明有所未盡，則其所發必有不能實用其力，而苟焉以自欺者。然或己明而不謹乎此，則其所明又非己有，而無以為進德之基。故此章之指，必承上章而通考之，然後有以見其用力之始終，其序不可亂而功不可闕如此云"* - "The classic says, 'Desiring sincerity in one's intentions, first attain knowledge.' It is also said, 'Knowledge arrives, and then intentions become sincere.' Because the clarity of the mind has not been fully exhausted, what is initiated will inevitably be unable to fully utilize its strength, leading to self-deception. However, some may be enlightened but not cautious in this, and what is understood is also not truly one's own, providing no basis for advancing virtue. Therefore, the pointing of this chapter must inherit from the previous chapter and comprehensively consider it. Then there is a way to see the beginning and end of its application of strength. Its sequence cannot be disorderly, and its achievements cannot be lacking. Thus it is said."

"1. 殉 : 或作「徇」。《摛藻堂四庫全書薈要》本作「徇」"* - "1. 殉: Alternatively written as 「徇」. In the work '摛藻堂四庫全書薈要,' it is originally written as 「徇」."

Paragraph 8
-----------

"所謂脩身在正其心者，身有所忿懥，則不得其正；有所恐懼，則不得其正；有所好樂，則不得其正；有所憂患，則不得其正" - "That which is called cultivating the body is in the correctness of the mind. If there is anger and worry in the body, then it cannot be correct. If there is fear and anxiety in the body, then it cannot be correct. If there is liking and pleasure in the body, then it cannot be correct. If there is worry and trouble in the body, then it cannot be correct."

"程子曰：「身有之身當作心。」忿，弗粉反。懥，敕值反。好、樂，並去聲。忿懥，怒也。蓋是四者，皆心之用，而人所不能無者。然一有之而不能察，則欲動情勝，而其用之所行，或不能不失其正矣"* - "Cheng Zi stated, 'The body, possessing something, should act in accordance with the mind. Unrestrained anger rebounds, and ungoverned anxiousness returns. Likes and joys, both have departing tones. Both anger and anxiousness are forms of anger. Indeed, these four are all functions of the mind, and things that people cannot do without. However, if one possesses them but cannot examine them, desires and emotions may prevail, and the actions arising from their use may sometimes deviate from what is right.'"

"心不在焉，視而不見，聽而不聞，食而不知其味" - "When the mind is not present, looking but not seeing, listening but not hearing, eating but not knowing the taste."

"心有不存，則無以檢其身，是以君子必察乎此而敬以直之，然後此心常存而身無不脩也"* - "If the mind is not maintained, one cannot examine their conduct. Therefore, a noble person must examine in this regard and (examine) with respect, making it straight. Then, this mind is always maintained, and the body is not without cultivation." 

"此謂脩身在正其心。打開字典		右傳之七章。釋正心脩身" - "This is called cultivating oneself by rectifying one's heart. Open the dictionary to the seventh chapter of the Commentary of Zuo. Explain the correct mind and cultivate one's character."

"此亦承上章以起下章。蓋意誠則真無惡而實有善矣，所以能存是心以檢其身。然或但知誠意，而不能密察此心之存否，則又無以直內而脩身也。自此以下，並以舊文為正"* - "This also inherits from the previous chapter to initiate the next chapter. Indeed, if the intention is sincere, then there is truly no evil, and there is actual goodness. Therefore, one can preserve this mind to examine its own body. However, sometimes one may only know sincere intentions but cannot carefully examine whether this mind exists or not. Furthermore, without this, there is no way to cultivate the body uprightly from within. From this point onward, using the old text as the correct guide."

Paragraph 9 
-----------

"所謂齊其家在脩其身者：人之其所親愛而辟焉，之其所賤惡而辟焉，之其所畏敬而辟焉，之其所哀矜而辟焉，之其所敖惰而辟焉。故好而知其惡，惡而知其美者，天下鮮矣！"  - "What is meant by harmonizing one's family is in cultivating oneself. People distance themselves from what they hold dear, despise, fear, respect, pity, and from arrogance and laziness. Therefore, those who love yet recognize faults, and dislike yet recognize beauty, are rare in the world!"

"辟，讀為僻。惡而之惡、敖、好，並去聲。鮮，上聲。人，謂眾人。之，猶於也。辟，猶偏也。五者，在人本有當然之則；然常人之情惟其所向而不加審焉，則必陷於一偏而身不脩矣"* - "Estranged, read as secluded. Disliking and having aversions, both departing from extravagance and fondness. Xiǎn with a rising tone. 'People' refers to the multitude. '之' is akin to '於.' 'Estranged' here is like 'biased.' The five attitudes exist in human nature with a natural principle. Indeed, the emotional tendencies of ordinary people are solely directed towards what they desire without examining it. As a result, they will inevitably fall into one-sidedness, and the self will not be cultivated."

"故諺有之曰：「人莫知其子之惡，莫知其苗之碩。」" - "Therefore, there is a saying, 'People, no one knows the wrongdoings of their own children; none knows the prosperity of their own seedlings.'"

"諺，音彥。碩，協韻，時若反。諺，俗語也。溺愛者不明，貪得者無厭，是則偏之為害，而家之所以不齊也"* - "The term 'Yan' refers to refined pronunciation. 'Shuo' is a term with a harmonious rhyme, but at times, it appears reversed. 'Yan' also denotes common language or colloquial expressions. Excessive fondness and insatiable greed lead to ignorance, causing harm through bias and resulting in disharmony within the family."

"此謂身不脩不可以齊其家。打開字典		右傳之八章。釋脩身齊家" - "This is called, if oneself is not cultivated, one cannot bring harmony to their family. Open the dictionary. In the eighth chapter of the Zuo Commentary, explain the cultivation of oneself and the harmonization of the family."

Paragraph 10
------------

"所謂治國必先齊其家者，其家不可教而能教人者，無之。故君子不出家而成教於國：孝者，所以事君也；弟者，所以事長也；慈者，所以使眾也" - "What is meant by governing a country is that it must first put its own family in order. If one cannot manage and educate their own family but can instruct others, such a person is non-existent. Therefore, a gentleman achieves the instruction of the country without neglecting his own family. Filial piety is the means by which one serves the ruler, fraternal duty is the means by which one serves the elder, and compassion is the means by which one guides the multitude."

"弟，去聲。長，上聲。身脩，則家可教矣；孝、弟、慈，所以脩身而教於家者也；然而國之所以事君事長使眾之道不外乎此。此所以家齊於上，而教成於下也"* - ""Younger brother, with a departing tone; elder, with a rising tone. If one cultivates their moral character, then the family can be taught. Filial piety, brotherhood, and kindness are the means to cultivate one's own person and teach within the family. However, the reason why the country serves the ruler, attends to the elders, and dispatches orders to the people is nothing more than this. Therefore, this is the way for the family to be orderly above and to teach and achieve below"

"康誥曰「如保赤子」，心誠求之，雖不中不遠矣。未有學養子而后嫁者也！" - "Kang Gao states, 'It is like protecting a newborn child. With a sincere heart, seek it; although it may not be precise, it is not far away. There has never been one who educates and nurtures a son and then marries.'"

"中，去聲。此引書而釋之，又明立教之本不假強為，在識其端而推廣之耳"* - "In the middle, it is the departing tone. This quotes the book and explains it. Furthermore, it clearly establishes that the essence of teaching does not rely on force. It is in recognizing its essence and extending it."

"一家仁，一國興仁；一家讓，一國興讓；一人貪戾，一國作亂；其機如此。此謂一言僨事，一人定國" - "In one family practicing benevolence, the country thrives in benevolence. In one family practicing yielding, the country thrives in yielding. When one person is greedy and aggressive, it causes chaos in the country. This is the principle. This is called governing affairs with a single word; one person determines the fate of the country."

"僨，音奮。一人，謂君也。機，發動所由也。僨，覆敗也。此言教成於國之效"* - "The pronunciation of 僨 is 'fen.' The term 一人 refers to the ruler. 機 is the pivot from which movement originates. 僨 implies overthrow or defeat. These words indicate that teachings lead to the effectiveness of the state."

"堯舜帥天下以仁，而民從之；桀紂帥天下以暴，而民從之；其所令反其所好，而民不從。是故君子有諸己而后求諸人，無諸己而后非諸人。所藏乎身不恕，而能喻諸人者，未之有也" - "Yao and Shun governed the world with virtue, and the people followed. Jie and Zhou led with tyranny, and the people followed. When their commands contradicted their desires, the people did not comply. Therefore, a noble person reflects on oneself before seeking from others and refrains from criticizing others without self-reflection. One who lacks forgiveness within but still enlightens others is rare"

"好，去聲。此又承上文一人定國而言。有善於己，然後可以責人之善；無惡於己，然後可以正人之惡。皆推己以及人，所謂恕也，不如是，則所令反其所好，而民不從矣。喻，曉也"* - "Good, with a departing tone. Moreover, this is spoken in reference to the previous text about one person determining the fate of the country. Having goodness towards oneself, then one can blame others for their goodness; without evil towards oneself, then one can correct others' evils. All are extended from oneself. All extend from oneself to others; this is what is called forgiveness. If not like this, then what is commanded will go against what is liked, and the people will not follow. Analogy, it means to understand."

"故治國在齊其家" - "Therefore, governing the country is in harmonizing its household."

"通結上文"* - "Understanding and Connecting with the Previous Text." 

"詩云：「桃之夭夭，其葉蓁蓁；之子于歸，宜其家人。」宜其家人，而后可以教國人" - "The poem says, 'Peach trees are lush and tender; their leaves are luxuriant and flourishing; young men go out, returning to their homes; it is fitting for their family members. It is fitting for their family members, and thereafter, they can educate the people of the country."

"夭，平聲。蓁，音臻。詩周南桃夭之篇。夭夭，少好貌。蓁蓁，美盛貌。興也。之子，猶言是子，此指女子之嫁者而言也。婦人謂嫁曰歸。宜，猶善也"* - "In the poetry section of Zhou Nan in the Book of Songs, there is a poem about '桃夭.' Delicate and charming, with a youthful and beautiful appearance, and luxuriant and flourishing, with a beautiful and prosperous appearance. In a lively state. '之子' is akin to saying '此子,' here indicating a woman who is about to get married. Women refer to marriage as '歸' (returning or going to a new home), which is similar to being virtuous."

"云：「宜兄宜弟。」宜兄宜弟，而后可以教國人" - " "It is said, 'Should be elder brothers and younger brothers,' and only then can one teach the people of the country."

"詩小雅蓼蕭篇"* - "The Poem of Small Elegance: Reed and Willow Pieces"

"詩云：「其儀不忒，正是四國。」其為父子兄弟足法，而后民法之也" - "The Book of Songs says: 'Its ceremonies are without deviation; it is indeed the correct way for the four states.' Its role as a guide for the conduct of fathers, sons, and brothers is sufficient; and thereafter, it becomes the model for the conduct of the people"

"詩曹風鳴鳩篇。忒，差也"* - "The poetry of Cao in the 'Wind Singing Dove' chapter. '忒,' indicating deviation."

"此謂治國在齊其家" - "This is called governing a country, where putting things in order starts with balancing one's own household."

"此三引詩，皆以詠歎上文之事，而又結之如此。其味深長，最宜潛玩。"* - "These three quoted poems all praise and lament the matters of the preceding text, and conclude it in this way. Their taste is deep and profound, most suitable for quiet contemplation."

"右傳之九章。釋齊家治國" - "The Nine Chapters of the Records of the Right with Explanations on Governing the State of the Qi Family"

Paragraph 11
------------

"所謂平天下在治其國者：上老老而民興孝，上長長而民興弟，上恤孤而民不倍，是以君子有絜矩之道也" - "What is meant by stabilizing the world lies in governing one's country. The superior promotes the elderly, and the people thrive in filial piety. The superior promotes the elders, and the people thrive in respecting their younger siblings. The superior cares for the orphans and widows, and the people do not betray. Therefore, a noble person possesses the way of the compass and square."

"長，上聲。弟，去聲。倍，與背同。絜，胡結反。老老，所謂老吾老也。興，謂有所感發而興起也。孤者，幼而無父之稱。絜，度也。矩，所以為方也。言此三者，上行下效，捷於影響，所謂家齊而國治也。亦可以見人心之所同，而不可使有一夫之不獲矣。是以君子必當因其所同，推以度物，使彼我之間各得分願，則上下四旁均齊方正，而天下平矣"* - "Therefore, a person of virtue should follow that which is the same, deduce and use it as a standard to measure things, so that between others and ourselves, each can obtain their wishes. Then, the upper and lower, the four sides, will be evenly distributed, square, and upright, and the world will be at peace."

"所惡於上，毋以使下；所惡於下，毋以事上；所惡於前，毋以先後；所惡於後，毋以從前；所惡於右，毋以交於左；所惡於左，毋以交於右：此之謂絜矩之道" - "What is disliked above, do not use to make lower. What is disliked below, do not use to serve above. What is disliked in front, do not use as first or second. What is disliked behind, do not use to follow before. What is disliked on the right, do not exchange with the left. What is disliked on the left, do not exchange with the right. This is called the way of standard and square."

"惡、先，並去聲。此覆解上文絜矩二字之義。如不欲上之無禮於我，則必以此度下之心，而亦不敢以此無禮使之。不欲下之不忠於我，則必以此度上之心，而亦不敢以此不忠事之。至於前後左右，無不皆然，則身之所處，上下、四旁、長短、廣狹，彼此如一，而無不方矣。彼同有是心而興起焉者，又豈有一夫之不獲哉。所操者約，而所及者廣，此平天下之要道也。故章內之意，皆自此而推之"* - "This passage discusses the importance of maintaining a balanced and respectful approach in all aspects of life. It emphasizes the need to avoid disrespect from others by approaching them with humility and sincerity. The text suggests that when people share similar positive mindsets, harmony and mutual benefit can be achieved, leading to the proper governance of the world. The essential way to achieve this is by holding tight to principles while reaching broadly. The meaning within the chapters is derived from and propelled forward by this fundamental principle."


"詩云：「樂只君子，民之父母。」民之所好好之，民之所惡惡之，此之謂民之父母" - "The poem states that music is meant only for virtuous individuals, who are considered the parents of the people. What the people truly like, they like, and what they truly dislike, they dislike. This is what is referred to as being the parents of the people"

"樂，音洛。只，音紙。好、惡，並去聲，下並同。詩小雅南山有臺之篇。只，語助辭。言能絜矩而以民心為己心，則是愛民如子，而民愛之如父母矣"* - "Music, its sound flows like a river. Only sound, resembling paper. Good and evil, both with a falling tone, below sharing the same. In poetry, there is a composition named 'South Mountain Terrace.' Only, serving as a linguistic particle. Words can measure standards, using the hearts of the people as one's own, then it is like loving the people as children, and the people love it as parents."

"詩云：「節彼南山，維石巖巖，赫赫師尹，民具爾瞻。」有國者不可以不慎，辟則為天下僇矣" - "As the poem says, before the Shang Dynasty lost its troops, they were able to match the Supreme Deity. Overseeing rituals in the Shang Dynasty, their stern commands were not easily altered. When the ruler follows the Way and gains the support of the people, then they obtain the state; if they lose the support of the people, then they lose the state."

"喪，去聲。儀，詩作宜。峻，詩作駿。易，去聲。詩文王篇。師，眾也。配，對也。配上帝，言其為天下君，而對乎上帝也。監，視也。峻，大也。不易，言難保也。道，言也。引詩而言此，以結上文兩節之意。有天下者，能存此心而不失，則所以絜矩而與民同欲者，自不能已矣"* - "Mourning, with a departing tone. Ceremonies in poetry made appropriate. Lofty in poetry made excellent, with a departing tone. In the poetry and literature of King Wen. A teacher denotes the multitude, matching and confronting with the God above, speaking of being the ruler of the world and confronting the God above. Supervise to see, lofty means great. Not easy, indicating difficulty in preservation. The way means to speak, quoting poetry and saying this to connect the meanings of the two preceding sections. One who has the world, able to preserve this mindset without losing it, then the reason for holding moral standards and sharing desires with the people, oneself cannot stop."

"是故君子先慎乎德。有德此有人，有人此有土，有土此有財，有財此有用" - "Therefore, the noble person should prioritize caution regarding virtue. With virtue, there are people; with people, there is land; with land, there is wealth; with wealth, there is utility."

"先慎乎德，承上文不可不慎而言。德，即所謂明德。有人，謂得眾。有土，謂得國。有國則不患無財用矣"* - "First, be cautious about virtue. Continuing from the previous passage, speaking without caution is not permissible. Virtue, that is what is called illustrious virtue. Having people refers to gaining the support of the multitude. Having land refers to gaining a country. Having a country, then there is no worry about lacking wealth and resources."

"德者本也，財者末也" - "Virtue is the root, wealth is the branches."

"本上文而言"* - "In terms of the original text." 

"外本內末，爭民施奪" - "Externally principle, internally aim; contend for the people, implement (policies of) deprivation." 

"人君以德為外，以財為內，則是爭鬥其民，而施之以劫奪之教也。蓋財者人之所同欲，不能絜矩而欲專之，則民亦起而爭奪矣"* - "The ruler, with virtue as the external and wealth as the internal, results in contention and fighting among the people, applying it with the teaching of extortion. For those who seek wealth have a common desire; they cannot measure and regulate their desires and want to monopolize it. Then the people also rise and contend to snatch it."

"是故財聚則民散，財散則民聚" - "Therefore, when wealth accumulates, people disperse; when wealth scatters, people gather."

"外本內末故財聚，爭民施奪故民散，反是則有德而有人矣"* - "Wealth accumulates from external sources and gathers within; consequently, there is contention among the people for distribution, leading to the seizing of wealth, and hence the scattering of the people. Conversely, when this is reversed, there is virtue, and there are people."

"是故言悖而出者，亦悖而入；貨悖而入者，亦悖而出" - "Therefore, words that are contrary when spoken are also contrary when entering; goods that are contrary when entering are also contrary when going out."

"悖，布內反。悖，逆也。此以言之出入，明貨之出入也。自先慎乎德以下至此，又因財貨以明能絜矩與不能者之得失也"* - "Deviation means going against, implying a reversal or opposition to the established order. This discussion on deviation serves to explain the dynamics of entrance and exit, making clear the flow of goods. Starting from the initial caution regarding virtue, it has descended to this point. Furthermore, it uses wealth and goods to elucidate the gains and losses of those who can or cannot adhere to the established measure or standard."

"康誥曰：「惟命不于常！」道善則得之，不善則失之矣" - "Duke Kang of Zhou said: 'It is only fate that does not follow the usual course! If one follows the path of virtue, then one obtains it; if one is not virtuous, then one loses it.'"

"，言也。因上文引文王詩之意而申言之，其丁寧反覆之意益深切矣"* - "This is talking. Building upon the meaning of the quoted King's poem in the preceding text, he elaborates on it. The intention of careful repetition becomes even more profound."

"楚書曰：「楚國無以為寶，惟善以為寶。」" - "The Chu state does not regard anything as treasure; it regards only virtue as treasure."

"楚書，楚語。言不寶金玉而寶善人也"* - "The Chu writings, the Chu language: speaking not valuing gold and jade, but valuing virtuous people."

"舅犯曰：「亡人無以為寶，仁親以為寶。」" - "Uncle Fan said, 'A deceased person has nothing to value, but benevolence and family are to be valued as treasures.'"

"舅犯，晉文公舅狐偃，字子犯。亡人，文公時為公子，出亡在外也。仁，愛也。事見檀弓。此兩節又明不外本而內末之意"* - "Uncle Fan refers to Hu Yan, the uncle of Duke Wen of Jin, with the style name Zi Fan. The term 'the person who is away' refers to Duke Wen's son, who was in exile abroad during Duke Wen's time. Benevolence is love. The matter is observed in the case of Tan Gong. These two sections also clearly illustrate that the meaning is not beyond the main point but within the subsidiary context."

"秦誓曰：「若有一个臣，斷斷兮無他技，其心休休焉，其如有容焉。人之有技，若己有之，人之彥聖，其心好之，不啻若自其口出，寔能容之，以能保我子孫黎民，尚亦有利哉。人之有技，媢疾以惡之，人之彥聖，而違之俾不通，寔不能容，以不能保我子孫黎民，亦曰殆哉。」" - "The sworn oath of Qin says: "If there is a minister, firm and without other skills, his mind is calm and composed; it's as if he has tolerance. If a person has skills as if they were his own, a person who is virtuous and sage-like, his heart loves it, no less than if it came out from his own mouth. Indeed, he can tolerate it, in order to protect our children, grandchildren, and the common people; it is indeed beneficial. However, a person with skills, envying and hating it with malice, a person who is virtuous and sage-like, going against it and causing it not to be accessible, indeed, he cannot tolerate it, and because he cannot protect our children, grandchildren, and the common people, it is almost perilous."

"个，古賀反，書作介。斷，丁亂反。媢，音冒。秦誓，周書。斷斷，誠一之貌。彥，美士也。聖，通明也。尚，庶幾也。媢，忌也。違，拂戾也。殆，危也"* - "Individually, in ancient times, praised and reversed, the writings are made as an introduction. Cut off, the disorder of the fourth earthly branch is reversed. Envy, the sound is concealed. The oath of Qin, the book of Zhou. Firm and decisive, the appearance of sincerity and unity. Virtuous and handsome, a beautiful scholar. The sage, bright and clear. Esteeming, nearly as. Envy, it is also jealousy. To violate, it goes against and deviates. Almost, it is dangerous."

"唯仁人放流之，迸諸四夷，不與同中國。此謂唯仁人為能愛人，能惡人" - "Only the virtuous person releases [it], bursting forth towards the various four barbarian tribes, not the same with [those within] China. This is called, only the virtuous person can love people, can dislike people."

"迸，讀為屏，古字通用。迸，猶逐也。言有此媢疾之人，妨賢而病國，則仁人必深惡而痛絕之。以其至公無私，故能得好惡之正如此也"* - "The character "迸" is interchangeable with "屏" in ancient times, and it has a similar meaning to "逐," which is to pursue or follow. Speaking of a person who harbors malicious jealousy, hinders virtuous individuals, and harms the country, a person of kindness will surely strongly dislike and abhor such an individual. This is because their fairness and lack of selfishness enable them to correctly understand likes and dislikes."

"見賢而不能舉，舉而不能先，命也；見不善而不能退，退而不能遠，過也" - "Seeing the virtuous but unable to promote them, promoting them but unable to lead – it is fate. Seeing the unvirtuous but unable to withdraw, withdrawing but unable to go far – it is a fault."

"命，鄭氏云「當作慢。」程子云：「當作怠。」未詳孰是。遠，去聲。若此者，知所愛惡矣，而未能盡愛惡之道，蓋君子而未仁者也"* - "The term '命' (fate or command), according to the Zheng school, should be understood as '慢' (slow or slack). Chengzi suggests interpreting it as '怠' (negligent or idle), and it is not yet clear which is correct. The pronunciation of '遠' is with the departing tone. If it is like this, one understands one's preferences and aversions but is unable to fully follow the path of preferences and aversions. This is indeed the case of a gentleman who has not yet attained benevolence."

"好人之所惡，惡人之所好，是謂拂人之性，菑必逮夫身" - "What good people hate, and bad people like, this is called going against human nature. Calamity will surely reach one's body."

"菑，古災字。夫，音扶。拂，逆也。好善而惡惡，人之性也；至於拂人之性，則不仁之甚者也。自秦誓至此，又皆以申言好惡公私之極，以明上文所引南山有臺、節南山之意"* -  "菑 is an ancient character for disaster. Emphasizing the pronunciation '扶,' it means to go against or oppose. Liking the good and disliking the bad is human nature; when it comes to opposing human nature, it is those who lack benevolence to an extreme. From the Qin Dynasty's vows to this point, it is again all to express the extremes of likes and dislikes, public and private, to clarify the meaning of the previously cited '南山有臺' and '節南山.'" 

"是故君子有大道，必忠信以得之，驕泰以失之" - "Therefore, a noble person possesses the great way; it is necessary to have loyalty and trustworthiness to obtain it, and arrogance and haughtiness lead to its loss."

"君子，以位言之。道，謂居其位而修己治人之術。發己自盡為忠，循物無違謂信。驕者矜高，泰者侈肆。此因上所引文王、康誥之意而言。章內三言得失，而語益加切，蓋至此而天理存亡之幾決矣"* - "A noble person, in terms of their position, embodies the Way by residing in their social role and cultivating self-discipline to govern others. Sincerity involves utmost exertion and sacrifice, while trustworthiness entails following the natural order without deviation. Arrogance is characterized by pride and loftiness, and extravagance involves excess and lack of restraint. These principles are derived from the writings of King Wen and Kang Gao. Within the chapter, the merits and shortcomings of the three statements are discussed, and the language intensifies, indicating a critical moment where the fate of cosmic principles may be on the verge of determination."

"生財有大道，生之者眾，食之者寡，為之者疾，用之者舒，則財恒足矣" - "There is a great way to generate wealth, those who generate it are many, those who consume or benefit from it are few, those who work for it do so earnestly, those who use or enjoy it do so leisurely, then wealth will always be sufficien"

"恒，胡登反。呂氏曰：「國無遊民，則生者眾矣；朝無幸位，則食者寡矣；不奪農時，則為之疾矣；量入為出，則用之舒矣。愚按：此因有土有財而言，以明足國之道在乎務本而節用，非必外本內末而後財可聚也。自此以至終篇，皆一意也"* - "Constantly, why ascend and revolt? Master Lü said, "If a country has no wandering people, then the number of those born is many. If there are no fortunate positions in the court, then there are few who eat. Not seizing the agricultural seasons, then sickness will come. Measure what comes in for what goes out, then its usage will be relaxed." The foolish one says: According to this, it is spoken because there is land and wealth. In order to make clear that the way to sufficiency for the country lies in focusing on the fundamentals and being frugal. It is not necessary to accumulate wealth by focusing on externalities, basics, internal affairs, and the end. From this point to the end of the text, all is of one mind."

"仁者以財發身，不仁者以身發財" - "The benevolent person, using wealth, develops the self; the non-benevolent person, using the self, develops wealth."

"發，猶起也。仁者散財以得民，不仁者亡身以殖貨"* - "To release, as if rising. A benevolent person disperses wealth to gain the people. A person lacking in benevolence loses their life using it to increase wealth."

"未有上好仁而下不好義者也，未有好義其事不終者也，未有府庫財非其財者也" - "Never has there been one above excelling in benevolence while below lacking in righteousness. Never has there been one who is good in righteousness, and yet his endeavors do not reach completion. Never has there been wealth in the government treasuries that is not regarded as the people's wealth." 

"上好仁以愛其下，則下好義以忠其上；所以事必有終，而府庫之財無悖出之患也"* - "The superior, being fond of benevolence, loves those beneath him; then, those below, fond of righteousness, are loyal to those above them. Therefore, affairs will certainly come to an end, and the wealth of the treasury will not have problems going contrary to this."

"孟獻子曰：「畜馬乘不察於雞豚，伐冰之家不畜牛羊，百乘之家不畜聚斂之臣，與其有聚斂之臣，寧有盜臣。」此謂國不以利為利，以義為利也" - "Meng Xianzi said: Keeping horses for riding without observing chickens and pigs, cutting ice without raising cattle and sheep in the household, and in a family of a hundred chariots, not raising ministers who accumulate and exploit. Rather than having ministers who accumulate and exploit, would rather have ministers who are thieves. This is called a country that does not consider profit as profit but considers righteousness as profit."

"畜，許六反。乘、斂，並去聲。孟獻子，魯之賢大夫仲孫蔑也。畜馬乘，士初試為大夫者也。伐冰之家，卿大夫以上，喪祭用冰者也。百乘之家，有采地者也。君子寧亡己之財，而不忍傷民之力；故寧有盜臣，而不畜聚斂之臣。此謂以下，釋獻子之言也"* - "Regarding the raising of animals, permit a change to six. Riding and collecting, both with the departing tone. Meng Xianzi, a virtuous grand officer of Lu, is Zhongsun Mie. Raising horses and riding them, scholars, in their initial attempts to become grand officers, engage in this practice. The family that cuts ice comprises high-ranking officers and above, who use ice in funeral ceremonies. The family with a hundred chariots comprises those who have acquired land. A noble person would rather lose their own wealth than be reluctant to harm the strength of the people. Hence, they would prefer treacherous ministers over those who hoard and accumulate. This is called following and abiding by, explaining the words of Xianzi (Meng Xianzi)."

"長國家而務財用者，必自小人矣。彼為善之，小人之使為國家，菑害並至。雖有善者，亦無如之何矣！此謂國不以利為利，以義為利也" - "To govern a country and emphasize financial affairs must be done by individuals of low character. Those who act virtuously make individuals of low character serve the country, bringing calamities and harm together. Although there are virtuous individuals, there is also nothing to be done about it! This signifies a country that does not regard personal gain as gain but regards righteousness as gain." 

"長，上聲。「彼為善之」，此句上下，疑有闕文誤字。自，由也，言由小人導之也。此一節，深明以利為利之害，而重言以結之，其丁寧之意切矣"* - "The term "長" is in the rising tone. The phrase "彼為善之" may be understood as "those who do good." Regarding this sentence and its context, there is a suspicion of missing or erroneous characters. The term "自" means "self" or "from," and "由" means "from" or "by," indicating that the words may be influenced or led by less honorable individuals. In this section, there is a deep understanding of the harm that comes from considering personal gain as gain, and there is a repeated emphasis to conclude or solidify the point, expressing a meticulous and careful intention."

"右傳之十章。釋治國平天下" - "In Chapter Ten of the Zuo Zhuan, the text elucidates the principles of governing the state and ensuring stability throughout the entire realm."

"此章之義，務在與民同好惡而不專其利，皆推廣絜矩之意也。能如是，則親賢樂利各得其所，而天下平矣"* - "The significance of this chapter lies in aligning likes and dislikes with the people and not exclusively pursuing its own interests, all to promote the intention of extending principles and guidelines. If it can be done in this way, then being close to the virtuous and delighting in benefits, each obtaining what they desire, the world will be at peace"

"凡傳十章：前四章統論綱領指趣，後六章細論條目功夫。其第五章乃明善之要，第六章乃誠身之本，在初學尤為當務之急，讀者不可以其近而忽之也" - "All transmitted in ten chapters: The first four chapters unify and discuss the main principles, pointing the way. The following six chapters elaborate on details and items, focusing on skillful efforts. Its fifth chapter clarifies the essence of goodness, the sixth chapter is the foundation of sincerity in one's character, especially crucial for beginners; readers should not neglect it, even though it is near."

References
----------
[1] - https://ctext.org/analects/xue-er/zh - 論語, 學而 - first section of The analects, Chinese text project 

[2] - https://ctext.org/si-shu-zhang-ju-ji-zhu/da-xue-zhang-ju/zh - 四書章句集注, 
 大學章句  - Great learning section of Xu Zhi's collected commentaries on the four books, Chinese text project ; note. any chinese quotations unless otherwise stated, will be took from 四書章句集注

[3] - https://iep.utm.edu/zhu-xi-chu-hsi-chinese-philosopher/#H2 - internet encyclopedia of philosophy

[4] - Confucianism: A Very Short Introduction by Daniel K. Gardner (isbn: 9780195398915), pp. 34-35

[5] - 17세기 조선, 마음 의 철학: 송 시열 학단 의 마음 에 관한 탐구 (isbn: 9788967352264)  

